Adding support for default interface function members (#681)
dotnet/csharpstandard: standard/interfaces.md

An interface defines a contract. A class or struct that implements an interface shall adhere to its contract. An interface may inherit from multiple base interfaces, and a class or struct may implement multiple interfaces.

> Interfaces may contain various kinds of members, as described in [§19.4](interfaces.md#194-interface-members). The interface itself may provide an implementation for some or all of the function members that it declares. Members for which the interface does not provide an implementation are abstract. Their implementations are supplied by derived interfaces or by classes or structs that implement the interface.

Reviewer: This does not appear to be quite correct in a well-known implementation:

```csharp
interface A { public string Name { get; } }

interface B : A { pubic string Name { get => "asda"; } }
```

produces a warning re hiding and the use of `new`; of course it works if `B` is a class.

Change the implementation in `B` to be explicit (`string A.Name`) and all is good, so is this just this para not being explicit about being explicit as in line 133?

Reviewer 2: Slight word change that helps.

An interface defines a contract. A class or struct that implements an interface shall adhere to its contract. An interface may inherit from multiple base interfaces, and a class or struct may implement multiple interfaces.

> Interfaces may contain various kinds of members, as described in [§18.4](interfaces.md#184-interface-members). The interface itself may provide an implementation for some or all of the function members that it declares. Members for which the interface does not provide an implementation are abstract. Their implementations are supplied by derived interfaces or by classes or structs that implement the interface. Members with an implementation may be declared virtual.

Reviewer: There appears to semantics missing around how the new members defined in an interface (as opposed to being simply declared) interact with the inheritance chain, `base` invocation, etc. There are some *examples* further which might be attempting to fill in gaps, but the semantics need to be normative.

For example: in the contract-only model we might have `I` with a declaration for `M`, and classes `A : I` and `B : A`; with `A.M` declared `virtual`, `B.M` with `override` and `base.M` in `B` invoking `A.M`.

Say it is decided to move `A`’s definition of `M` directly into `I` marked `virtual`. The call `A.M()` is still valid, but is the `override` definition in `B` still valid? What about the `base` call?

Further does any definition of `M` in `A` have to match any `virtual`, or lack of one, used for `M` in `I`?

To add to the fun consider `A`, `B: I, A` & `C : B` with `M` in `A` & `I` and (`B` and/or `C`) – what does invoking `M` on any of the classes invoke? When are `base` calls valid?

A final one, if the contact model we might have `I`, `A : I`, `B : A` & `C : B` with `M` declared in `I`, defined as `virtual in `A`, and as `override` in `C` (so no definition in `B`). What happens if `A`’s definition is moved into `I`?

The semantics of basic set of combinations need to be defined – unless I’ve misread they appear not to be.

Reviewer 3: I think Nigel's got a point in terms of questions that need answering - although the answers may be in this PR already (or just unchanged). I would say that it's easier to reason about those questions if they're presented as "is this code valid" (or "what does this code do") rather than in terms of changes between one version of the code and another though.

Thinking about the first scenario:

- Just for reference: base access is in section 12.8.15, in expressions.md - it looks like it hasn't changed in this PR; override methods are in 15.6.5 (classes.md)
- I don't believe either the `override` definition or `base.M()` is valid in this case. I'm assuming this is what we're talking about:

```csharp
public interface I
{
    virtual void M()
    {
        Console.WriteLine("I.M");
    }
}

public class A : I
{
}

public class B : A, I
{
    // Error: 'B.M()': no suitable method found to override
    public override void M()
    {
        // Error: 'A' does not contain a definition for 'M'
        base.M();
    }
}
```

Assuming I've interpreted Nigel's scenario correctly, the question is whether these errors are what the proposed spec would show.

I'm pretty sure the "override" error is correct as specified, as `override` only talks about searching the *class* hierarchy for virtual members.

I'm currently unclear on whether the base access "should" work under the current spec. `base.M()` is specified to be equivalent to `((A) this).M()`, which is also invalid, but I can't immediately see where - see my comment on old line 245.

Reviewer: @jskeet – Your code is almost my first example, mine just uses `B : A` (no `, I`). I was careful not to say what any particular implementation does, both because what is important is what the design intends and because I haven’t exhuastively analysed an implementation.

C# used to be a single-inheritance (S-I) language, adding definitions into interfaces does not make it multi-inheritance M-I) in, say, the C++ sense but rather makes it some other kind of M-I. A cursory look at the current version of a certain well known implementation show it appears to have a primary ancestor (your parent class, the standard S-I model) and secondary ancestors (“uncle” interfaces, a move in the direction of M-I models) where your parent is your child’s grandparent (as in S-I), but your uncle’s are not your child’s great-uncles (as in ?) – or something like that!

Reviewer 2: This was updated before the 9/3 meeting.

> Interfaces may contain various kinds of members, as described in [§18.4](interfaces.md#184-interface-members). The interface itself may provide ***default implementation***s for some or all of the function members that it declares, in which case, those members are *not* part of the interface contract. For those members for which the interface does not provide default implementations, the interface merely specifies the members that shall be supplied by classes or structs that implement the interface.

Reviewer 2: I think we should remove this phrase.  Any interface members that have a default implementation are part of the interface contract, but they have a default implementation:

```suggestion
Interfaces may contain various kinds of members, as described in [§18.4](interfaces.md#184-interface-members). The interface itself may provide ***default implementation***s for some or all of the function members that it declares. For those members for which the interface does not provide default implementations, the interface merely specifies the members that shall be supplied by classes or structs that implement the interface.
```

> Interfaces may contain various kinds of members, as described in [§18.4](interfaces.md#184-interface-members). The interface itself may provide ***default implementation***s for some or all of the function members that it declares, in which case, those members are *not* part of the interface contract. For those members for which the interface does not provide default implementations, the interface merely specifies the members that shall be supplied by classes or structs that implement the interface.

Reviewer 4: The grammar was strange and it also seemed to rule out having the implementations be supplied by another interface.
```suggestion
Interfaces may contain various kinds of members, as described in [§18.4](interfaces.md#184-interface-members). The interface itself may provide ***default implementation***s for some or all of the function members that it declares, in which case, those members are *not* part of the interface contract. Members for which the interface does not provide default implementations are abstract. Their implementations are supplied by derived interfaces or by classes or structs which implement the interface.
```

> > *Note*: Historically, adding a new function member to an interface impacted all existing consumers of that interface type; it was a breaking change! The addition of default interface function member implementations allowed developers to upgrade an interface while still enabling any implementors to override that implementation. Users of the interface can accept the default implementation as a non-breaking change; however, if their requirements are different, they can override the default implementations. *end note*

Reviewer 4: In C# 13, when ref structs are allowed to implement interfaces, ref structs can't make use of DIMs. Therefore in C# 13+, adding an interface member goes back to being a breaking change (but only for consumers who implement your interface on a `ref struct`).

Reviewer 2: Right. At that time, we'll need to update this note.

An interface defines a contract. A class or struct that implements an interface shall adhere to its contract. An interface may inherit from multiple base interfaces, and a class or struct may implement multiple interfaces.

Interfaces may contain various kinds of members, as described in [§18.4](interfaces.md#184-interface-members). The interface itself may provide an implementation for some or all of the function members that it declares. Members for which the interface does not provide an implementation are abstract. Their implementations are supplied by derived interfaces or by classes or structs that implement the interface. Members with an implementation may be declared virtual.

> > *Note*: Historically, adding a new function member to an interface impacted all existing consumers of that interface type; it was a breaking change. The addition of interface function member implementations allowed developers to upgrade an interface while still enabling any implementors to override that implementation. Users of the interface can accept the implementation as a non-breaking change; however, if their requirements are different, they can override the provided implementations. *end note*

Reviewer 4: Side note: In C# 13, it becomes a breaking change again to add an interface member when considering that ref structs may implement interfaces. Ref structs don't support default interface members and must manually implement every instance interface member regardless of whether it has a default implementation. (https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/whats-new/csharp-13#ref-struct-interfaces, https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/builtin-types/ref-struct#restrictions-for-ref-struct-types-that-implement-an-interface)

Reviewer 2: I added an HTML comment on this note so our future selves can find it quickly.

```ANTLR
interface_member_declaration
    : constant_declaration

>     | field_declaration

Reviewer 2: This is incorrect. Interface can't include non-static fields. We'll need to rework the grammar in classes.md to provide a distinction between instance and static data fields.

Reviewer 4: Perhaps this could be addressed with text placing on restrictions, as may have to be the case for events which have many permutations. (https://github.com/dotnet/csharpstandard/pull/681/files#r2180552691)

Reviewer 3: Agreed in the meeting that we don't need this in the grammar, but possibly emphasize "only static" in the text.

Reviewer 2: Proposed edit that I'd like @Nigel-Ecma to weigh in on before I proceed:

I have removed the *interface_method_header* that was flagged in our last meeting. I think the grammar can be further simplified:  

We currently have *class_member_declaration* in 15.3.1.  This is almost exactly repeated in *interface_member_declaration* in 18.4.1. The difference is the omission of *finalizer* and *constructor* declarations.

I believe we can simplify these rules by renaming *class_member_declaration* as *member_declaration*. We already have normative text that describes the differences. and it does keep the grammar simpler (maybe?).  I don't think this is the time to remove *struct_member_declaration*. But, that feels like the right task later as we get more struct type declarations.

Let me know what you think and I'll make the additional edits.

Reviewer: @BillWagner – I would recommend not to make any further *optional* grammar changes at this time; both because there are other things to address, and because I don’t think it is clear the switching to more general grammar with added semantic rules for different contexts is a *simplification* in this case – it may or may not be.

(A good rule of thumb is for *reference grammar*s to be as explicit as reasonable with fewer context sensitive semantic rules; an *implementation grammar* may tend to the more lenient. But rules are aways flexible and there is often no *right* answer per se. In this case? No idea yet.)

Reviewer 3: @RexJaeschke to file a follow-on issue - we may want to come back to this, but we're happy to merge this PR as-is without addressing it.

Reviewer 2: See #1423

    | method_declaration
    | property_declaration

>     | event_declaration

Reviewer 2: field-like events can't be declared in an interface. This will also require more splitting of the grammar rules for events to distinguish the two syntaxes for them.

Reviewer 4: They may be if they are static, though. To address this through splitting of grammar rules, does that entail splitting `event_declaration` into `static_event_declaration`, `instance_custom_event_declaration`, and `instance_fieldlike_event_declaration`? Could we instead add non-grammar text which says "Event declarations in interfaces must either be static or explicitly declare accessors"?

Reviewer 4: Actually, field-like events can sometimes be declared depending also on whether they are abstract or virtual/sealed.

```cs
using System;

interface I
{
    // Allowed, has a static backing field.
    public static event EventHandler StaticFieldlike;
    // Allowed, has accessors.
    public static event EventHandler StaticCustom { add { } remove { } }

    // Allowed, implicitly abstract.
    public event EventHandler InstanceFieldlikeAbstract;

    // Disallowed, asks for an instance backing field because it is not abstract.
    public virtual event EventHandler InstanceFieldlikeVirtual;
    public sealed event EventHandler InstanceFieldlikeSealed;

    // Disallowed: CS8712 event cannot use event accessor syntax
    public abstract event EventHandler InstanceCustomAbstract { add; remove; }

    // Allowed, implicitly virtual.
    public event EventHandler InstanceCustomVirtual { add { } remove { } }

    // Allowed, has accessors.
    public sealed event EventHandler InstanceCustomSealed { add { } remove { } }
}
```

Reviewer 4: So all event declaration syntaxes are allowed in interfaces except for the following:
1. An instance event with the `virtual` or `sealed` modifiers *must* declare accessors.
1. An instance event with the `abstract` modifier *must not* declare accessors.

Reviewer 3: I'm so glad the two of you are looking at this - my take on the topic is that if everything else is okay, I'd be happy to merge and create a follow-up issue for events which goes into all the relevant details.

Reviewer 2: Edited based on https://github.com/dotnet/csharpstandard/pull/681#discussion_r2180562405

    | indexer_declaration
    | static_constructor_declaration
    | operator_declaration
    | type_declaration
    ;
```

> An interface declaration declares zero or more members. The members of an interface shall be constants, fields, methods, properties, events, indexers, operators, constructors, and types, some of which may be instance, others static, as described in the subclauses for each interface member kind.

Reviewer 2: This needs to clarify that interfaces can't include instance data fields (including field-like events). It might be the best place to mention that interfaces use the same syntax for auto-implemented properties for an abstract property.

> All interface members implicitly have public access; however, an explicit access modifier ([§7.5.2](basic-concepts.md#752-declared-accessibility)) is permitted.

Reviewer 4: This statement doesn't apply to static constructors which become allowed in C# 8 as part of DIMs.

> An interface function member whose declaration includes a body is an implicitly `virtual` member unless the `sealed` or `private` modifier is used. The `virtual` modifier may be used on a function member that would otherwise be implicitly `virtual`. Similarly, although `abstract` is implied for interface function members without bodies, that modifier may be given explicitly. A non-virtual function member may be declared using the `sealed` keyword.

Reviewer 4: This only applies to instance members.

A `private` or `sealed` function member of an interface shall have a body. A `private` function member shall not have the modifier `sealed`.

An explicitly implemented function member shall not have the modifier `sealed`.

An *interface_declaration* creates a new declaration space ([§7.3](basic-concepts.md#73-declarations)), and the type parameters and *interface_member_declaration*s immediately contained by the *interface_declaration* introduce new members into this declaration space. The following rules apply to *interface_member_declaration*s:

- The name of a type parameter in the *variant_type_parameter_list* of an interface declaration shall differ from the names of all other type parameters in the same *variant_type_parameter_list* and shall differ from the names of all members of the interface.

> - The name of a method shall differ from the names of all other kinds of function members declared in the same interface. In addition, the signature ([§7.6](basic-concepts.md#76-signatures-and-overloading)) of a method shall differ from the signatures of all other methods declared in the same interface, and two methods declared in the same interface may not have signatures that differ solely by `in`, `out`, and `ref`.

Reviewer 4: Does "function members" include classes? For instance, this does not compile:
```cs
interface I
{
    void Foo();
    class Foo { }
}
```

Reviewer 4: If "function members" _does_ include classes then this line above is incorrect because a nested class may have both the `private` and `sealed` modifiers:

> A `private` or `sealed` function member of an interface shall have a body. A `private` function member shall not have the modifier `sealed`.

Reviewer 3: 15.3.1 (for classes) states this as "The name of a method shall differ from the names of all other non-methods declared in the same class."

Reviewer 3: Bill will run some tests on this.

Reviewer 2: The rules for declarations in an interface mirror those in a class (in 15.3.1). I re-wrote this section to use the structure of later sections to minimize duplication of the rules. This now only specifies the differences. Because of those changes, the class rules on inheritance (15.3.4) and `new` (15.3.5) are specifically called out.

> - The name of a non-function member shall differ from the names of all other non-function member declared in the same interface.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The name of a non-function member shall differ from the names of all other non-function members declared in the same interface.
```

- An explicitly implemented function member shall not have the modifier `sealed`.

The inherited members of an interface are specifically not part of the declaration space of the interface. The rules for inheritance in classes (§15.3.4) do not apply to interfaces. The `new` modifier can hide an interface member declared in a base interface. The rules for the `new` modifier in classes (§15.3.5) apply to interface member declarations.

> *Note*: The members in class `object` are not, strictly speaking, members of any interface ([§18.4](interfaces.md#184-interface-members)). However, the members in class `object` are available via member lookup in any interface type ([§12.5](expressions.md#125-member-lookup)). *end note*

The set of members of an interface declared in multiple parts ([§15.2.7](classes.md#1527-partial-type-declarations)) is the union of the members declared in each part. The bodies of all parts of the interface declaration share the same declaration space ([§7.3](basic-concepts.md#73-declarations)), and the scope of each member ([§7.7](basic-concepts.md#77-scopes)) extends to the bodies of all the parts.

> Consider an interface `IA` with an implementation for a member `M`. As `M` is not abstract, outside that interface or any interface derived from it, that name is not visible. It must be accessed through a reference whose compile-time type is identity convertible to `IA`.

Reviewer 3: The second sentence sounds it's reiterating something we already know - but I can't see where that's specified at the moment. I *believe* this is key to the `base.M()` question earlier.

Reviewer: First “Consider an…” sounds like it is informative but it is normative text.

I’m not sure what the 2nd sentence – “As `M` is not abstract, outside that interface or any interface derived from it, that name is not visible.” – it reads to me as the implementation is only visible from *inside* the interface or interfaces derived from it which would exclude from classes which implement the interface? Am I reading this wrong?

Reviewer 2: I've added some raw notes in the last commit. Here's the sample I was working from. (I'll polish the notes in the morning):

```csharp
var b1 = new DimModel.B();
b1.M();

var b = new DimModel2.B();
b.M();

var c = new DimModel2.C();
c.M();

namespace ContractModel
{
    public interface I
    {
    }

    public class A : I
    {
        public virtual void M() => Console.WriteLine("A.M");
    }

    public class B : A
    {
        public override void M() => base.M();
    }
}

namespace DimModel
{
    public interface I
    {
        public virtual void M() => Console.WriteLine("I.M");
    }

    public class A : I
    {
        //public virtual void M() => Console.WriteLine("A.M");
    }

    public class B : A
    {
        // No suitable method to override.
        // A does not contain a definition for M.
        //public override void M() => base.M();

        // Instead use:
        public void M() => (this as I).M();
        // If A has an implementation calls A.M(), otherwise calls I.M()
    }
}

namespace DimModel2
{
    public interface I
    {
        public virtual void M() => Console.WriteLine("I.M");
    }

    public class A : I
    {
        public virtual void M() => Console.WriteLine("A.M");
    }

    public class B : A, I
    {
        // No suitable method to override.
        // A does not contain a definition for M.
        //public override void M() => base.M();

        // Instead use:
        public override void M() => base.M();
        // If A has an implementation calls A.M(), otherwise calls I.M()
    }

    public class C : B
    {
    }
 }

namespace ContractModel3
{
    public interface I
    {
        void M();
    }

    public class A : I
    {
        public virtual void M() => Console.WriteLine("A.M");
    }

    public class B : A
    {
        // No suitable method to override.
        // A does not contain a definition for M.
        //public override void M() => base.M();

        // Instead use:
        // public override void M() => base.M();
        // If A has an implementation calls A.M(), otherwise calls I.M()
    }

    public class C : B
    {
        public override void M() => base.M();
    }
}

namespace DimModel3
{
    public interface I
    {
        public virtual void M() => Console.WriteLine("I.M");
    }

    public class A : I
    {
        //public virtual void M() => Console.WriteLine("A.M");
    }

    public class B : A
    {
        // No suitable method to override.
        // A does not contain a definition for M.
        //public override void M() => base.M();

        // Instead use:
//        public override void M() => base.M();
        // If A has an implementation calls A.M(), otherwise calls I.M()
    }

    public class C : B
    {
        public void M() => (this as I).M();
    }
}
```

Reviewer 2: The latest update is incorrect if generic constraints are used. 

```csharp
public interface I { void M() {} }

public class C : I {}

public void TestThings<T>(T arg) where T : I 
{
   arg.M(); // valid
}
```

<!-- Example: {template:"standalone-console", name:"InterfaceMember", expectedOutput:["IB.M", "IA.P = 10", "IB.P = 20"]} -->
```csharp
interface IA
{
    public int P { get { return 10; } }
    public void M()
    {
        Console.WriteLine("IA.M");
    }
}

interface IB: IA
{
    public new int P { get { return 20; } }
    void IA.M()
    {
        Console.WriteLine("IB.M");
    }
}

class C: IB { }

class Test
{
    public static void Main()
    {
        C c = new C();
        ((IA)c).M();                               // cast needed
        Console.WriteLine($"IA.P = {((IA)c).P}");  // cast needed
        Console.WriteLine($"IB.P = {((IB)c).P}");  // cast needed
    }
}
```

> Within the interfaces `IA` and `IB`, member `M` is accessible directly by name. However, within method `Start`, we cannot write `c.M()` or `c.P`, as those names are not visible. To find them, casts to the appropriate interface type are needed.

Reviewer 3: Where is `Start()`? Should that just be `Main()`?

Some declarations, such as *constant_declaration* (§15.4) have no restrictions in interfaces.

The inherited members of an interface are specifically not part of the declaration space of the interface. The rules for inheritance in classes (§15.3.4) do not apply to interfaces. The `new` modifier can hide an interface member declared in a base interface. The rules for the `new` modifier in classes (§15.3.5) apply to interface member declarations.

> *Note*: The members in class `object` are not, strictly speaking, members of any interface ([§18.4](interfaces.md#184-interface-members)). However, the members in class `object` are available via member lookup in any interface type ([§12.5](expressions.md#125-member-lookup)). *end note*

The set of members of an interface declared in multiple parts ([§15.2.7](classes.md#1527-partial-type-declarations)) is the union of the members declared in each part. The bodies of all parts of the interface declaration share the same declaration space ([§7.3](basic-concepts.md#73-declarations)), and the scope of each member ([§7.7](basic-concepts.md#77-scopes)) extends to the bodies of all the parts.

> > *Example*: Consider an interface `IA` with an implementation for a member `M`. As `M` is not abstract, outside that interface or any interface derived from it, that name is not visible. It must be accessed through a reference whose compile-time type is identity convertible to `IA`.

Reviewer 3: I thought I'd added a comment here before, but apparently not. Where does this come from:

> As `M` is not abstract, outside that interface or any interface derived from it, that name is not visible.

If that *is* specified somewhere, it may answer a lot of questoins, but I didn't see where it was specified.

Reviewer 2: I added that to the normative language. And, it's slightly incorrect: The compile time type must be an interface type, and implicit conversions (from derived interface to base interface) are allowed.

Reviewer 2: In the most recent commit, the normative language is at lines 577-586 in interfaces.md

Reviewer 3: Hmm... was it "The name of a non-abstract interface member is only visible in that interface and interfaces derived from it. That member can be accessed only through a reference whose compile-time type is an interface type that is implicitly convertible to the interface where the non-abstract member is declared."

That was removed in https://github.com/dotnet/csharpstandard/pull/681/commits/28e33919f38b49d86b49537a19e74a1c839b9e14

... I don't see any equivalent now.

The set of members of an interface declared in multiple parts ([§15.2.7](classes.md#1527-partial-type-declarations)) is the union of the members declared in each part. The bodies of all parts of the interface declaration share the same declaration space ([§7.3](basic-concepts.md#73-declarations)), and the scope of each member ([§7.7](basic-concepts.md#77-scopes)) extends to the bodies of all the parts.

> *Example*: Consider an interface `IA` with an implementation for a member `M`. As `M` is not abstract, outside that interface or any interface derived from it, that name is not visible. It must be accessed through a reference whose compile-time type is an interface that is implicitly convertible to `IA`.
>
> <!-- Example: {template:"standalone-console", name:"InterfaceMember", expectedOutput:["IB.M", "IA.P = 10", "IB.P = 20"]} -->
> ```csharp
> interface IA
> {
>     public int P { get { return 10; } }
>     public void M()
>     {
>         Console.WriteLine("IA.M");
>     }
> }
> 

> > interface IB: IA

Reviewer 3: Nit: I *think* we've become consistent in having a space before the colon here. (I know I've mentioned that recently, but I can't remember which PR. Apologies if it's repetition here.)

- The `abstract` modifier is implied for interface function members without bodies; that modifier may be given explicitly.
- An interface instance function member whose declaration includes a body is an implicitly `virtual` member unless the `sealed` or `private` modifier is used.
- A `private` or `sealed` function member of an interface shall have a body.
- A `private` function member shall not have the modifier `sealed`.
- A derived interface may override an abstract member declared in a base interface.
- An explicitly implemented function member shall not have the modifier `sealed`.

An abstract member `M1` may be overridden by either a derived interface or an implementing class or struct. That member `M1` can be accessed through a reference of the implementing type.

A member `M2` with definition in an interface requires any overriding member to declare an explicit interface implementation (§19.6.2). That member `M2` only be accessed through an interface instance.

Some declarations, such as *constant_declaration* (§15.4) have no restrictions in interfaces.

> The inherited members of an interface are specifically not part of the declaration space of the interface. The rules for inheritance in classes (§15.3.4) do not apply to interfaces. The `new` modifier can hide an interface member declared in a base interface. The rules for the `new` modifier in classes (§15.3.5) apply to interface member declarations.

Reviewer 2: This should add that members declared in an interface are not inherited by classes implementing that interface.

Reviewer 2: Reverted this paragraph to the existing text. It's all still valid.

> *Note*: The members in class `object` are not, strictly speaking, members of any interface ([§19.4](interfaces.md#194-interface-members)). However, the members in class `object` are available via member lookup in any interface type ([§12.5](expressions.md#125-member-lookup)). *end note*

The set of members of an interface declared in multiple parts ([§15.2.7](classes.md#1527-partial-type-declarations)) is the union of the members declared in each part. The bodies of all parts of the interface declaration share the same declaration space ([§7.3](basic-concepts.md#73-declarations)), and the scope of each member ([§7.7](basic-concepts.md#77-scopes)) extends to the bodies of all the parts.

> > *Example*: Consider an interface `IA` with an implementation for a member `M`. As `M` is not abstract, outside that interface or any interface derived from it, that name is not visible. It must be accessed through a reference whose compile-time type is an interface that is implicitly convertible to `IA`.

Reviewer 3: @BillWagner to consider whether this example is useful or not. (The explanation is not helpful at the moment.)

If not, let's delete it - and the markdownlint-disable following it.

Reviewer 2: I updated the explanation to explain the lookup rules.

    ;
```

This clause augments the description of members in classes (§15.3) with restrictions for interfaces. The Interface members are declared using *member_declaration*s with the following additional rules:

- A *finalizer_declaration* is not allowed.
- Instance constructors, *constructor_declaration*s, are not allowed.
- All interface members implicitly have public access; however, an explicit access modifier ([§7.5.2](basic-concepts.md#752-declared-accessibility)) is permitted except on static constructors (§15.12).
- The `abstract` modifier is implied for interface function members without bodies; that modifier may be given explicitly.
- An interface instance function member whose declaration includes a body is an implicitly `virtual` member unless the `sealed` or `private` modifier is used. The `virtual` modifier may be given explicitly.
- A `private` or `sealed` function member of an interface shall have a body.
- A `private` function member shall not have the modifier `sealed`.
- A derived interface may override an abstract or virtual member declared in a base interface.
- An explicitly implemented function member shall not have the modifier `sealed`.

> Some declarations, such as *constant_declaration* (§15.4) have no restrictions in interfaces.

Reviewer: This feels a little superfluous as everything that is different is listed, but I also guess its harmless…

Reviewer 2: I don't have strong feelings. I added this so that readers that compare class members with interface members and might think it was an omission.

> The inherited members of an interface are specifically not part of the declaration space of the interface. Thus, an interface is allowed to declare a member with the same name or signature as an inherited member. When this occurs, the derived interface member is said to *hide* the base interface member. Hiding an inherited member is not considered an error, but it does cause a compiler to issue a warning. To suppress the warning, the declaration of the derived interface member shall include a `new` modifier to indicate that the derived member is intended to hide the base member. This topic is discussed further in (§7.7.2.3).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The inherited members of an interface are specifically not part of the declaration space of the interface. Thus, an interface is allowed to declare a member with the same name or signature as an inherited member. When this occurs, the derived interface member is said to *hide* the base interface member. Hiding an inherited member is not considered an error, but it does result in a warning (§7.7.2.3).
```

> If a `new` modifier is included in a declaration that doesn’t hide an inherited member, a warning is issued to that effect. This warning is suppressed by removing the `new` modifier.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a `new` modifier is included in a declaration that doesn’t hide an inherited member, a warning is issued to that effect.
```

> If a `new` modifier is included in a declaration that doesn’t hide an inherited member, a warning is issued to that effect. This warning is suppressed by removing the `new` modifier.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If a `new` modifier is included in a declaration that doesn’t hide an inherited member, a warning is issued to that effect.
```

    ;
```

This clause augments the description of members in classes (§15.3) with restrictions for interfaces. The Interface members are declared using *member_declaration*s with the following additional rules:

- A *finalizer_declaration* is not allowed.
- Instance constructors, *constructor_declaration*s, are not allowed.
- All interface members implicitly have public access; however, an explicit access modifier ([§7.5.2](basic-concepts.md#752-declared-accessibility)) is permitted except on static constructors (§15.12).
- An interface instance function member whose declaration includes a body is an implicitly `virtual` member unless the `sealed` or `private` modifier is used.
- The `virtual` modifier may be used on a function member that would otherwise be implicitly `virtual`.
- The `abstract` modifier is implied for interface function members without bodies; that modifier may be given explicitly.

> - A derived interface may override an abstract member declared in a base interface. A non-virtual instance function member may be declared using the `sealed` keyword.

Reviewer 4: (I'm used to using the term 'virtual' in the sense of 'virtual call.' If that is acceptable here, then the term 'virtual' covers abstract members as well. If not, then I guess we should mention both?)
```suggestion
- A derived interface may override a virtual member declared in a base interface. A non-virtual instance function member may be declared using the `sealed` keyword.
```
Also, I believe the only way to override is to provide an explicit implementation; otherwise, you end up declaring a new virtual member (and the `override` keyword is not supported). Should the means of overriding be clarified here?

Reviewer 2: Notes for a commit tomorrow to address all @jnm2 's comments regarding *abstract* vs. *non-virtual*, and the comments regarding the accessibility of the name.

1. An explicit interface implementation is the only way to provide an override of a member defined in an interface. Any other declaration (`virtual` or otherwise) is a new member. It doesn't *hide* the member defined in an interface because of the accessibility rules...
2. An instance interface member is `virtual` (or `abstract`) by default. To prevent implementing types or derived interfaces from providing an overriding implementation, it must be declared `sealed`.
3. A member defined in an interface is accessible only through a reference to that interface type. I'm not sure "visible" is the right term.

- A `private` or `sealed` function member of an interface shall have a body.
- A `private` function member shall not have the modifier `sealed`.
- An explicitly implemented function member shall not have the modifier `sealed`.

> - The name of a non-abstract interface member is only visible in that interface and interfaces derived from it. That member can be accessed only through a reference whose compile-time type is an interface type that is implicitly convertible to the interface where the non-abstract member is declared.

Reviewer 4: Edit: I'm taking this suggestion back in favor of removing the condition, see following comment

~~(And, similar question about whether the term 'virtual' is in the sense of 'virtual call' and thus includes abstract members)~~
```suggestion
- The name of a non-virtual interface member is only visible in that interface and interfaces derived from it. That member can be accessed only through a reference whose compile-time type is an interface type that is implicitly convertible to the interface where the non-abstract member is declared.
```

Reviewer 4: I'd like to remove this condition (including where this statement is mirrored ten lines down in the note). It is not due to the abstractness or non-abstractness of the interface member that the name is visible within the class. Rather, it is due to whether the class or a base class declares a matching _class_ member.

```suggestion
- The name of an interface member is only visible in that interface and interfaces derived from it. That member can be accessed only through a reference whose compile-time type is an interface type that is implicitly convertible to the interface where the non-abstract member is declared.
```

Reviewer 2: Reworked these rules in this section.

>         C c = new C();
>         ((IA)c).M();                               // cast needed
>         Console.WriteLine($"IA.P = {((IA)c).P}");  // cast needed
>         Console.WriteLine($"IB.P = {((IB)c).P}");  // cast needed
>     }
> }
> ```
>
>Within the interfaces `IA` and `IB`, member `M` is accessible directly by name. However, within method `Main`, we cannot write `c.M()` or `c.P`, as those names are not visible. To find them, casts to the appropriate interface type are needed. *end example*
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD028 -->

<!-- markdownlint-enable MD028 -->
> *Note*: See how the declaration of `M` in `IB` uses explicit interface implementation syntax. This is necessary to make that method override the one in `IA`; the modifier `override` may not be applied to a function member. *end note*

### §interface-fields Interface fields

This clause augments the description of fields in classes [§15.5](classes.md#155-fields) for fields declared in interfaces.

Interface fields are declared using *field_declaration*s ([§15.5.1](classes.md#1551-general)) with the following additional rules:

- It is a compile-time error for *field_declaration* to declare an instance field.

> - As a static *field_declaration* has an implementation ([§18.1](interfaces.md#181-general)), it is *not* abstract.

Reviewer 4: Does the language have a concept of abstract fields at all? I didn't think so. I don't believe the metadata format supports declaring an abstract field either. If this statement is not in contrast to anything, can it go without saying?

Reviewer 2: removed this line. (redundant with class rules)

- A `private` or `sealed` function member of an interface shall have a body.
- A `private` function member shall not have the modifier `sealed`.
- A derived interface may override an abstract or virtual member declared in a base interface.
- An explicitly implemented function member shall not have the modifier `sealed`.

Some declarations, such as *constant_declaration* (§15.4) have no restrictions in interfaces.

The inherited members of an interface are specifically not part of the declaration space of the interface. Thus, an interface is allowed to declare a member with the same name or signature as an inherited member. When this occurs, the derived interface member is said to *hide* the base interface member. Hiding an inherited member is not considered an error, but it does cause a compiler to issue a warning. To suppress the warning, the declaration of the derived interface member shall include a `new` modifier to indicate that the derived member is intended to hide the base member. This topic is discussed further in (§7.7.2.3).

> If a `new` modifier is included in a declaration that doesn’t hide an inherited member, a warning is issued to that effect. This warning is suppressed by removing the `new` modifier.

Reviewer 3: Perhaps "resolved" rather than "suppressed"? (Possibly the same a couple of lines ago.)

I tend to think that "suppressing" a warning is a matter of "I know there's something that the compiler thinks is wrong, but I know better" - whereas here it's really a matter of the whether the declarations are clear and "correct". (Not a great way of putting it, but I hope folks see where I'm coming from.)

> *Note*: The members in class `object` are not, strictly speaking, members of any interface ([§19.4](interfaces.md#194-interface-members)). However, the members in class `object` are available via member lookup in any interface type ([§12.5](expressions.md#125-member-lookup)). *end note*

The set of members of an interface declared in multiple parts ([§15.2.7](classes.md#1527-partial-type-declarations)) is the union of the members declared in each part. The bodies of all parts of the interface declaration share the same declaration space ([§7.3](basic-concepts.md#73-declarations)), and the scope of each member ([§7.7](basic-concepts.md#77-scopes)) extends to the bodies of all the parts.

> > *Example*: Consider an interface `IA` with an implementation for a member `M` and a property `P`. An implementing type `C` doesn't provide an implementation for either `M` or `P`. They must be accessed through a reference whose compile-time type is an interface that is implicitly convertible to `IA` of `IB`. These members aren't found through member lookup on a variable of type `C`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
> *Example*: Consider an interface `IA` with an implementation for a member `M` and a property `P`. An implementing type `C` doesn't provide an implementation for either `M` or `P`. They must be accessed through a reference whose compile-time type is an interface that is implicitly convertible to `IA` or `IB`. These members aren't found through member lookup on a variable of type `C`.
```

The set of members of an interface declared in multiple parts ([§15.2.7](classes.md#1527-partial-type-declarations)) is the union of the members declared in each part. The bodies of all parts of the interface declaration share the same declaration space ([§7.3](basic-concepts.md#73-declarations)), and the scope of each member ([§7.7](basic-concepts.md#77-scopes)) extends to the bodies of all the parts.

> Consider an interface with a default implementation for a member `M`. As `M` is not part of that interface’s contract, outside that interface or any interface derived from it, that name is not visible. How then can it be accessed? The following code shows how:

Reviewer 2: Two thoughts:

1. Lines 258 - 294 should probably be non-normative. The normative language should be that an interface member must be accessed as an explicit interface member.
2. I don't like the phrasing about "not part of the contract". Instead, I'd suggest we phrase this in terms of "visibility" or even "inheritance". An interface member with a default implementation must be accessed through a reference of that interface type. It isn't visible as a member of an implementing class, or derived interface.

Reviewer 4: Agreed. The real reason why you can't access `M` directly on `C` is that `C` doesn't declare a public `M`.

This is not really new with DIMs. It happens any time `C` skips creating its own public `M` to implicitly implement the interface. What allows it to skip creating a public `M` is the presence of an explicit implementation somewhere. The only thing that's new with DIMs is that the explicit implementation can be in any of the interfaces as well as being in C or any of its base classes.

Reviewer 3: Agreed on all fronts, but I'd be happy with a "merge and raise an issue" approach for this one.

Reviewer 3: Possibly adjust style to be less didactic? And remove contract.

Reviewer 2: TODO:  Search for "not part of the contract" and update to "abstract" terminology in recent commits.

Reviewer 2: wordsmithed to say "must be accessed through a reference whose compile time type is identity convertible to `IA`.

    }
}

class C: IB { }

class Test
{
    public static void Main()
    {
        C c = new C();
        ((IA)c).M();                               // cast needed
        Console.WriteLine($"IA.P = {((IA)c).P}");  // cast needed
        Console.WriteLine($"IB.P = {((IB)c).P}");  // cast needed
    }
}
```

Within the interfaces `IA` and `IB`, member `M` is accessible directly by name. However, within method `Start`, we cannot write `c.M()` or `c.P`, as those names are not visible. To find them, casts to the appropriate interface type are needed.

> *Note*: See how the declaration of `M` in `IB` uses explicit interface implementation syntax. This is necessary to make that method override the one in `IA`; the modifier `override` may not be applied to a function member. *end note*

### §interface-constants Interface constants

[§15.4](classes.md#154-constants) covers constant declarations in classes. When declaring constants in interfaces, that text needs to be interpreted in the context of an interface, and, where necessary, it is augmented and/or replaced by text in this subclause.

*constant_declaration* is described in [§15.4](classes.md#154-constants).

> As a *constant_declaration* is considered to have a default implementation ([§18.1](interfaces.md#181-general)), it is *not* part of the interface’s contract.

Reviewer 4: The "default impl means it's out of the contract" philosophy comes up here as well and in the following blocks. I'm not sure yet that I accept this philosophy. One could also say that the member is still in the contract. That is, the class is still "on the hook" to provide the whole contract, including this member- it's just that the class has chosen to fulfill that contract by deferring to the default implementation for this member.

With C# 13 and ref structs, this becomes clearer. Ref structs can't make use of default implementations, so they must implement every member explicitly. This shows that every interface member really is part of the interface contract, even when a default implementation exists for it.

See §interface-static-constructors for information regarding the allocation and initialization of constants.

> *Note*: See §interface-fields for an example of using various kinds of static members declared within an interface. *end note*

### §interface-fields Interface fields

[§15.5](classes.md#155-fields) and its subclauses cover field declarations in classes. When declaring fields in interfaces, that text needs to be interpreted in the context of an interface, and, where necessary, it is augmented and/or replaced by text in this subclause.

*field_declaration* is described in [§15.5.1](classes.md#1551-general).

It is a compile-time error for *field_declaration* to declare an instance field.

> As a static *field_declaration* is considered to have a default implementation ([§18.1](interfaces.md#181-general)), it is *not* part of the interface’s contract.

Reviewer 4: Here and elsewhere: do we want to talk about fields and constants as "having implementations"? Do we even want to talk about static members as having ***default*** implementations, as though there was any "slot" being "implemented" where we selected the "default" option for the slot? There's no virtual dispatch for a static call, so this language seems forced.

(Ignoring for now that static abstract interface members come in C# 11)

>     {
>         Console.WriteLine("static members initialized");
>         Console.WriteLine($"constant = {IX.constant}, field = {IX.field}");
>         field = 50;
>         Console.WriteLine("static constructor has run");
>     }
> }
>
> public class Test: IX
> {
>     public static void Main()
>     {
>         Console.WriteLine($"constant = {IX.constant}, field = {IX.field}");
>     }
> }
> ```
>
> The output produced is
>
> ```console
> static members initialized
> constant = 100, field = 0
> static constructor has run
> constant = 100, field = 50
> ```
>
> *end example*

See §interface-static-constructors for information regarding the allocation and initialization of static fields.

### 18.4.2 Interface methods

[§15.6](classes.md#156-methods) and its subclauses cover method declarations in classes. When declaring methods in interfaces, that text needs to be interpreted in the context of an interface, and, where necessary, it is augmented and/or replaced by text in this subclause.

```ANTLR
interface_method_header
    : identifier '(' parameter_list? ')' ';'
    | identifier type_parameter_list '(' parameter_list? ')'
      type_parameter_constraints_clause* ';'

>     ;

Reviewer 4: Why retain `interface_method_header` when `interface_method_declaration` is removed?

Reviewer 3: @BillWagner to sync with @Nigel-Ecma to make sure we don't get conflicts, but we think we can remove interface_method_header.

Reviewer 2: The next commit removes it. That rule isn't mentioned anywhere in the text.

```

The *attributes*, *return_type*, *ref_return_type*, *identifier*, and *parameter_list* of an interface method declaration have the same meaning as those of a method declaration in a class ([§15.6](classes.md#156-methods)).

*method_modifier* shall not include `override`.

> An interface method declaration that has a *block* as a *method_body* is a default implementation ([§18.1](interfaces.md#181-general)), so it is *not* part of the interface’s contract. A *method_declaration* shall not have *type_parameter_constraints_clause*s unless it also has a *type_parameter_list*.

Reviewer 2: Two bits here:

Again, my concern with "part of the contract" as the terminology. And, an expression bodied member is legal, so *block* is the wrong term.

The list of requirements for valid combinations of modifiers stated for a class method is extended, as follows:

> - A static declaration that is not extern or abstract shall have a *block* as a *method_body*.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- A static declaration that is not extern shall have a *block* as a *method_body*.
```
Until C# 11, a static declaration cannot be abstract.

- A virtual declaration that is not extern shall have a *block* as a *method_body*.
- A private declaration that is not extern shall have a *block* as a *method_body*.
- A sealed declaration that is not extern shall have a *block* as a *method_body*.

> - An async declaration shall have a *block* as a *method_body*.

Reviewer 2: This needs some wordsmithing. I don't think we want "block" here. Expression bodied members are legal.

    }
}
```

Within the interfaces `IA` and `IB`, member `M` is accessible directly by name. However, within method `Start`, we cannot write `c.M()` or `c.P`, as those names are not visible. To find them, casts to the appropriate interface type are needed.

> *Note*: See how the declaration of `M` in `IB` uses explicit interface implementation syntax. This is necessary to make that method override the one in `IA`; the modifier `override` may not be applied to a function member. *end note*

### §interface-fields Interface fields

This clause augments the description of fields in classes [§15.5](classes.md#155-fields) for fields declared in interfaces. *field_declaration* is described in [§15.5.1](classes.md#1551-general).

It is a compile-time error for *field_declaration* to declare an instance field.

As a static *field_declaration* is considered to have a default implementation ([§18.1](interfaces.md#181-general)), it is *not* abstract.

> *Example*: The following program contains static members of various kinds:
>
> <!-- Example: {template:"standalone-console", name:"InterfaceFields", inferOutput:true} -->
> ```csharp
> public interface IX
> {

> >     public const int constant = 100;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
>     public const int Constant = 100;
```

(And later references.)

      type_parameter_constraints_clause* ';'
    ;
```

The *attributes*, *return_type*, *ref_return_type*, *identifier*, and *parameter_list* of an interface method declaration have the same meaning as those of a method declaration in a class ([§15.6](classes.md#156-methods)).

*method_modifier* shall not include `override`.

An interface method declaration that has a block body or expression body as a *method_body* is a default implementation ([§18.1](interfaces.md#181-general)), so it is *not* abstract. A *method_declaration* shall not have *type_parameter_constraints_clause*s unless it also has a *type_parameter_list*.

The list of requirements for valid combinations of modifiers stated for a class method is extended, as follows:

- A static declaration that is not extern shall have a block body or expression body as a *method_body*.
- A virtual declaration that is not extern shall have a block body or expression body as a *method_body*.
- A private declaration that is not extern shall have a block body or expression body as a *method_body*.
- A sealed declaration that is not extern shall have a block body or expression body as a *method_body*.

> - An async declaration shall have a block body or expression body as a *method_body*.

Reviewer 3: I assume async is already "not extern" by prohibitions elsewhere?

This clause augments the description of methods in classes [§15.6](classes.md#156-methods) for methods declared in interfaces.

> Interface properties are declared using *method_declaration*s (§15.6)). The *attributes*, *return_type*, *ref_return_type*, *identifier*, and *parameter_list* of an interface method declaration have the same meaning as those of a method declaration in a class. Interface methods have the following additional rules:

Reviewer 4: Also, do we really need to enumerate some of the syntactic parts and say their meaning doesn't change? If so, should we include the type parameter list? ...what about attributes?
```suggestion
Interface methods are declared using *method_declaration*s (§15.6)). The *attributes*, *return_type*, *ref_return_type*, *identifier*, and *parameter_list* of an interface method declaration have the same meaning as those of a method declaration in a class. Interface methods have the following additional rules:
```

Interface properties are declared using *method_declaration*s (§15.6)). The *attributes*, *return_type*, *ref_return_type*, *identifier*, and *parameter_list* of an interface method declaration have the same meaning as those of a method declaration in a class. Interface methods have the following additional rules:

- *method_modifier* shall not include `override`.

> - A method whose body is a semi-colon (`;`) is `abstract`; the `abstract` modifier is not required, but is allowed.

Reviewer 4: Interesting. I intuitively refer to the presence of the semicolon as "having no body." Does the spec have an opinion yet on whether methods with semicolons have "semicolon bodies" or "no bodies"?

Reviewer 4: One nice thing about referring to this as "having no body" is that we can then just say "has a body" instead of saying "has a block body or expression body."

Reviewer 2: I like this. 

I think this phrasing is throughout the spec because in the dawn of time, every body was a "block body". Now that there are both expression bodies and block bodies, it might worth making an issue to define "a body" as either a "block body" or an "expression body" and then use that term.

I don't think this should block C# 8, but is a good future fix.

Thoughts from the committee as a whole?

Reviewer 3: I like it (@jnm2's perspective), myself.

Reviewer 4: Opened https://github.com/dotnet/csharpstandard/issues/1430 to track this suggestion further.

Reviewer 2: Logged as #1434

Interface events are declared using *event_declaration*s ([§15.8.1](classes.md#1581-general)), with the following additional rules:

- *event_modifier* shall not include `override`.
- A derived interface may implement an abstract interface event declared in a base interface (§15.8.5).
- It is a compile-time error for *variable_declarators* in an instance *event_declaration* to contain any *variable_initializer*s.
- An instance event with the `virtual` or `sealed` modifiers must declare accessors. It is *never* considered to be an automatically implemented field-like event ([§15.8.2](classes.md#1582-field-like-events)).
- An instance event with the `abstract` modifier must not declare accessors.
- The type of an interface event shall be input-safe.

### 19.4.5 Interface indexers

This clause augments the description of indexers in classes [§15.9](classes.md#159-indexers) for indexers declared in interfaces.

Interface indexers are declared using *indexer_declaration*s ([§15.9](classes.md#159-indexers)), with the following additional rules:

- *indexer_modifier* shall not include `override`.

> - An *indexer_declaration* that has an *expression body* or contains an accessor with a body is `virtual`; the `virtual` modifier is not required, but is allowed.

Reviewer: Maybe:

```suggestion
- An *indexer_declaration* that has an expression body or contains an accessor with a block body is `virtual`; the `virtual` modifier is not required, but is allowed.
```

in other clauses here expression body is not emphasised and block body is used.

Reviewer 2: This is the one comment where we crossed. They are all consistent now. You can resolve this is you're satisfied with the change.

Reviewer: @BillWagner I’m not seeing changes on this line or similar ones on the other clauses so they remain inconsistent. I've reloaded the page etc. so has GitHub messed up?

Reviewer 2: Updated. Again, this is one of those places where we need both "block body" and "expression body" here.

See https://github.com/dotnet/csharpstandard/pull/681/files#r2384262560 and replies.

- That interface provides an implementation for a member, and that implementation is accessed as the most specific implementation (§most-specific-implementation) for that member.

> *Note*: In the case where none of the preceding actions take place, the static constructor for an interface may not execute for a program where instances of types that implement the interface are created and used. *end note*

To initialize a new closed interface type, first a new set of static fields for that particular closed type is created. Each of the static fields is initialized to its default value. Next, the static field initializers are executed for those static fields. Finally, the static constructor is executed.

> *Note*: See §interface-fields for an example of using various kinds of static members (including a Main method) declared within an interface. *end note*

### §interface-nested-types Interface nested types

This clause augments the description of nested types in classes [§15.3.9](classes.md#1539-nested-types) for nested types declared in interfaces.

> It is an error to declare a class type, struct type, or enum type within the scope of a type parameter that was declared with a *variance_annotation* ([§19.2.3.1](interfaces.md#19231-general)).

Reviewer 5: This may require changing the wording in §7.7.1 (Scopes / General).  In the following, the outer `T` is hidden by the inner `T`.

```csharp
interface IOuter<out T>
{
    interface IInner<T>
    {
        class C { }
    }
}
```

§7.7.1 currently says:

> The ***scope*** of a name is the region of program text within which it is possible to refer to the entity declared by the name without qualification of the name. Scopes can be *nested*, and an inner scope may redeclare the meaning of a name from an outer scope. (This does not, however, remove the restriction imposed by §7.3 that within a nested block it is not possible to declare a local variable or local constant with the same name as a local variable or local constant in an enclosing block.) The name from the outer scope is then said to be ***hidden*** in the region of program text covered by the inner scope, and access to the outer name is only possible by qualifying the name.

Within the definition of `interface IInner<T>` , it is not possible to refer to the `T` type parameter of `IOuter`.  According to this wording then, the definition of `class C` is not in the scope of the outer `T`.

Reviewer 5: Alternatively, this might be solved by adding "including any nested scopes" to the restriction here.

It is an error if in a class declaration the most specific override of some interface method is an abstract override that was declared in a class or an interface.

> *Example*:
>
> <!-- Example: {template:"standalone-lib-without-using", name:"InterfaceMethods5", expectedErrors:["CS0535"]} -->
> ```csharp
> interface IF
> {
>     void M();
> }
> 
> abstract class F : IF { } // error: 'F' does not implement 'IF.M'
> ```
>
> *end example*

It is an error if a property `P` has a most specific `get` accessor in one type `T1`, and a most specific `set` accessor in another type `T2`.

### 18.4.6 Interface member access

Interface members are accessed through member access ([§12.8.7](expressions.md#1287-member-access)) and indexer access ([§12.8.12.3](expressions.md#128123-indexer-access)) expressions of the form `I.M` and `I[A]`, where `I` is an interface type, `M` is a constant, field, method, property, or event of that interface type, and `A` is an indexer argument list. If `M` is non-abstract, the name `M` is visible only in the interface `I` and interfaces derived from `I`.

In a class `D`, with base class `B`, where `B` implements interface `I` and `I` defines a method `M()`:

> - The expression `base.M()` is valid only if `B` provides a definition for `M`. The expression `base.M()` is valid only if the most specific implementation (§most-specific-implementation) of `M` is in a class type.

Reviewer: Two sentences, both starting “The expression `base.M()` is valid only if”. Is this meant to be a conjunction, or was one sentence meant to replace the other?

Reviewer 2: refactored a bit in next commit.

- All the parameter types of an interface indexer shall be input-safe ([§19.2.3.2](interfaces.md#19232-variance-safety)).
- Any output or reference parameter types shall also be output-safe.

  > *Note*: Output parameters are required to be input-safe due to common implementation restrictions. *end note*

- The type of an interface indexer shall be output-safe if there is a get accessor, and shall be input-safe if there is a set accessor.

### §interface-operators Interface operators

This clause augments the description of *operator_declaration* members in classes [§15.10](classes.md#1510-operators) for operators declared in interfaces.

An *operator_declaration* in an interface is the implementation ([§19.1](interfaces.md#191-general)).

It is a compile-time error for an interface to declare a conversion, equality, or inequality operator.

### §interface-static-constructors Interface static constructors

This clause augments the description of static constructors in classes [§15.12](classes.md#1512-static-constructors) for static constructors declared in interfaces.

> The static constructor for a closed interface executes at most once in a given application domain. The execution of a static constructor is triggered by the first of the following actions to occur within an application domain:

Reviewer 4: Where is the term "closed interface" defined? I'm slightly concerned that this language will conflict with the "closed hierarchies" proposal.

Reviewer 2: Added an xref to §8.4.3. In this use, it's meant to mean a type that's not a open type. (`IEnumerable<int>` is a closed type, `IEnumerable<T>` is an open type.

- Any of the static members of the interface are referenced.

> - Before the Main method is called for an interface containing the Main method ([§7.1](basic-concepts.md#71-application-startup)) in which execution begins.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Before the `Main` method is called for an interface containing the `Main` method ([§7.1](basic-concepts.md#71-application-startup)) in which execution begins.
```

Reviewer 2: coming in next commit.

> - The implementation for a member defined in the interface is accessed as the most specific implementation (§most-specific-implementation) for that member.

Reviewer 3: I can't quite tell whether this is about "The implementation for (a member defined in the interface)" or "(The implementation for a member defined in the interface)". 

For example:

```csharp
interface I
{
    static I()
    {
        Console.WriteLine("static I()");
    }
    
    void M();
}

class C : I
{
    public void M()
    {
    }
}
```

... then in Main:

```csharp
I i = new C();
i.M();
```

Is the static constructor called or not? It looks like not... I suspect this is really about where the implementation lives. That's already one way of reading it of course, but I think it could be clearer.

Would "The interface provides an implementation for a member, and that implementation is accessed as the most specific implementation (§most-specific-implementation) for that member" work? (Or am I just splitting hairs? Happy to leave it if everyone else things it's already clear enough.)

Reviewer 2: This needs clarification. 

In the following, the static constructor *is* called:

```csharp
interface I
{
    static I()
    {
        Console.WriteLine("static I()");
    }

    void M() { }
}

class C2 : I
{
}
```

In the following, the static constructor *isn't* called:

```csharp
interface I
{
    static I()
    {
        Console.WriteLine("static I()");
    }

    void M() { }
}

class C2 : I
{
    void I.M()
    {
    }
}
```

(Note the implementation of `I.M()` in `C2`.

Reviewer 2: Updated in next commit. I used Jon's language, after verifying that the static constructor is only called for the interface where the member implementation is. Not for base interfaces nor derived interfaces.

To initialize a new closed interface type, first a new set of static fields for that particular closed type is created. Each of the static fields is initialized to its default value. Next, the static field initializers are executed for those static fields. Finally, the static constructor is executed.

> *Note*: See §interface-fields for an example of using various kinds of static members (including a Main method) declared within an interface. *end note*

### §interface-nested-types Interface nested types

This clause augments the description of nested types in classes [§15.3.9](classes.md#1539-nested-types) for nested types declared in interfaces.

It is an error to declare a class type, struct type, or enum type within the scope of a type parameter that was declared with a *variance_annotation* ([§19.2.3.1](interfaces.md#19231-general)).

> *Example*: The declaration of `C` below is an error.
>
> <!-- Example: {template:"standalone-lib-without-using", name:"InterfaceNestedTypes", expectedErrors:["CS8427"]} -->
> ```csharp
> interface IOuter<out T>
> {
>     class C { } // error: class declaration within scope of variant type parameter 'T'
> }
> ```
>
> *end example*

> ### §most-specific-implementation Most specific override

Reviewer 3: Rename the section to "Most specific implementation"? At the moment we appear to have both terms ("most specific implementation" and "most specific override") in use - I *hope* we can just use one.

Reviewer 3: Meeting resolution: most specific implementation is better.

Reviewer 2: coming in next commit.

> Every interface and class shall have a most specific override for every virtual member declared in all interfaces implemented by that type among the overrides appearing in the type or its direct and indirect interfaces. The ***most specific override*** is a unique override that is more specific than every other override. If there is no override, the member itself is considered the most specific override.

Reviewer 6: This is not correct. I believe this constraint only applies to concrete types (classes and structs). See [HERE](https://sharplab.io/#v2:C4LgTgrgdgNAJiA1AHwAIBYAEBZAhgSygAoBKTAbwFgAoAXxpsOAFMwAzXAY2cwEEaq1TMMwYcpANw161RlBbsuPAEKYQfATRGisvAHTZSFGTLkKO3TAGE1G6oO1j9hsuRMNqTVhZ4ARdcow1ppCItI0QA==)

Reviewer: @gafter – Hmm… Is your interface `D` usable? If you change `D` to a class an error is produced, if you leave it as an interface and declare `class E : D` an error is produced.

In other words is this an implementation choosing not to report an error if `D` is not used, but doing so once it is? 

Of course if `D` can be used without generating an error then the statement is indeed incorrect.

Reviewer 2: `D` can be used as follows:

```csharp
interface A
{
    void M();
}

interface B : A
{
    void A.M() { }
}

interface C : A
{
    void A.M() { }
}

interface D : B, C
{

}

public class Concrete : D
{
    void A.M() { }
}
```

I'll make an update soon.

- Otherwise, if `T` is a class and a direct or indirect base class declares an implementation of `I.M`, the most derived base class of `T` is the most specific override.
- Otherwise, if `I2` and `I3` are interfaces implemented by `T` and `I3` derives from `I2` either directly or indirectly, `I3.M` is a more specific implementation than `I2.M`.
- Otherwise, neither `I2.M` nor `I3.M` are more specific and an error occurs.

> *Example*:
>
> <!-- Example: {template:"standalone-lib-without-using", name:"InterfaceMethods4", expectedErrors:["CS8705"]} -->
> ```csharp
> interface IA
> {
>     void M() { Console.WriteLine("IA.M"); }
> }
> 
> interface IB : IA
> {
>     void IA.M() { Console.WriteLine("IB.M"); }
> }
> 
> interface IC: IA
> {
>     void IA.M() { Console.WriteLine("IC.M"); }
> }
> 
> abstract class C: IB, IC { } // error: no most specific override for 'IA.M'
> 
> abstract class D: IA, IB, IC // OK
> {
>     public abstract void M();
> }
> ```
>
> The most specific override rule ensures that a conflict (i.e., an ambiguity arising from diamond inheritance) is resolved explicitly by the programmer at the point where the conflict arises. *end example*

> It is an error if in a class declaration the most specific override of some interface method is an abstract override that was declared in a class or an interface.

Reviewer 3: Is this a counterexample? (This code compiles.)

```csharp
interface IF
{
  void M();
}

abstract class F : IF
{
    public abstract void M();
}
```

In `F`, the most specific override of `IF.M()` is `F.M()`, which is an abstract override declared in a class, isn't it?

Reviewer 3: Maybe just make it "in a concrete class declaration"? But we need to still require the abstract implementation in the class, even when the class is abstract. (Deleting `public abstract void M();` makes the above code fail to compile.)

Reviewer 3: Discussion in the meeting - this line is relevant in the following case:

```csharp
interface IF
{
    void M() => Console.WriteLine("I.M()");
}

abstract class AF : IF
{
    public abstract void M();
}

class CF : AF
{
    // This doesn't compile
}
```

Reviewer 2: Here's the condition it's trying to cover:

```csharp
interface A
{
    void M() {}
}

public abstract class C : A
{
    public abstract void M();
}

public class D : C, A
{
    // Most specific implementation (C.M) is abstract even though there is an implementation (A.M)
}
```

Reviewer 3: @BillWagner will consider deleting this sentence entirely, or converting it to a note.

Reviewer 2: I deleted this sentence and the following example.

> *Example*:
>
> <!-- Example: {template:"standalone-lib-without-using", name:"InterfaceMethods5", expectedErrors:["CS0535"]} -->
> ```csharp
> interface IF
> {
>     void M();
> }
> 
> abstract class F : IF { } // error: 'F' does not implement 'IF.M'
> ```
>
> *end example*

### 19.4.6 Interface member access

Interface members are accessed through member access ([§12.8.7](expressions.md#1287-member-access)) and indexer access ([§12.8.12.4](expressions.md#128124-indexer-access)) expressions of the form `I.M` and `I[A]`, where `I` is an interface type, `M` is a constant, field, method, property, or event of that interface type, and `A` is an indexer argument list.

In a class `D`, with direct or indirect base class `B`, where `B` directly or indirectly implements interface `I` and `I` defines a method `M()`:

> - The expression `base.M()` is valid only if `B` provides a definition for `M`. The expression `base.M()` is valid only if the most specific implementation (§most-specific-implementation) of `M` is in a class type. To access the most specific implementation if it was defined in an interface, use the cast expression `(this as I).M()` to refer to the most specific implementation (§most-specific-implementation) of `M` in `I` or an interface derived from `I`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The expression `base.M()` is valid only if the most specific implementation (§most-specific-implementation) of `M` is in a class type. To access the most specific implementation if it was defined in an interface, use the cast expression `(this as I).M()` to refer to the most specific implementation (§most-specific-implementation) of `M` in `I` or an interface derived from `I`.
```

(Or possibly some other change, but at the moment it's a bit odd.)

Reviewer 2: I took Jon's wording in the next commit.

Reviewer 2: I simplified this rule in its entirety.

- If `B` contains a method `M` without the `virtual` or `override` modifier, that method hides `I.M()` rather than overriding it.

> - If `B` contains a method `M` with a different parameter list, that method `M` is a distinct overload of `M`.

Reviewer 3: Do we need to be more specific than "different" here? Is a parameter list of `(object x)` "different" to a parameter list of `(dynamic x)`? (Hopefully there's another section we can refer to here.)

Reviewer 3: @BillWagner will look for appropriate wording.

Reviewer 2: I reworded to remove the odd wording requirement.

> <!-- FIX: need to define I<T>, then perhaps break into 2 files, first one a standalone-lib, the second, code-in-class-lib. -->
> ```csharp
> class B {}
> class D: B {}
> class E: B {}

> > class C: I<D>

Reviewer 4: The typical style is `ClassName : InterfaceName`, so I don't love this change. Elsewhere in the file, new code has been added that similarly does not follow the typical style.

Reviewer 3: Yup, I'd prefer a space after the class name too.

> This is actually a call to `C.M<E>`. But that call requires that `E` derive from `D`, so type safety would be violated here.
>
> *end example*
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD028 -->

<!-- markdownlint-enable MD028 -->
> *Note*: See §interface-fields for an example that not only shows a static method with default implementation, but as that method is called `Main` and has the right return type and signature, it’s also an entry point. *end note*

A virtual method with implementation declared in an interface may be overridden to be abstract in a derived interface. This is known as ***reabstraction***.

> *Example*:
>
> <!-- Example: {template:"standalone-lib-without-using", name:"InterfaceMethods2"} -->
> ```csharp
> interface IA
> {
>     void M() { Console.WriteLine("IA.M"); }
> }
> 
> interface IB: IA
> {
>     abstract void IA.M();    // reabstraction of M
> }
> ```
>
> This is useful in derived interfaces where the default implementation of a method is inappropriate and a more appropriate implementation should be provided by implementing classes. *end example*

> Every interface and class shall have a most specific implementation for every virtual member among the overrides appearing in the type or its direct and indirect interfaces. The ***most specific override*** is a unique override that is more specific than every other override. If there is no override, the member itself is considered the most specific override.

Reviewer 2: I moved this text to its own section. The most specific implementation applies to properties and other member types as well.

Reviewer 2: This section now starts on line 532

> *Note*: The most specific override rule ensures that an ambiguity arising from diamond interface inheritance is resolved explicitly by the programmer at the point where the conflict occurs. *end note*

> For a type `T` that is a struct or a class that implements interface `I` with a member `M`, the most specific implementation of `M` is:

Reviewer 3: I think this needs a bit of work. It sort of assumes that I2 and I3 exist (otherwise the final bullet doesn't make sense) but they're only defined in the penultimate bullet. (And the penultimate bullet seems to be assuming the interfaces have default implementations of M, maybe?)

Reviewer 3: @BillWagner and @jskeet will look at this offline

Reviewer 2: Wordsmithed and clarified. I think this is good now.

> 
> abstract class D: IA, IB, IC // OK
> {
>     public abstract void M();
> }
> ```
>
> The most specific override rule ensures that a conflict (i.e., an ambiguity arising from diamond inheritance) is resolved explicitly by the programmer at the point where the conflict arises. *end example*

It is an error if in a class declaration the most specific override of some interface method is an abstract override that was declared in a class or an interface.

> *Example*:
>
> <!-- Example: {template:"standalone-lib-without-using", name:"InterfaceMethods5", expectedErrors:["CS0535"]} -->
> ```csharp
> interface IF
> {
>     void M();
> }
> 
> abstract class F : IF { } // error: 'F' does not implement 'IF.M'
> ```
>
> *end example*

It is an error if a property `P` has a most specific `get` accessor in one type `T1`, and a most specific `set` accessor in another type `T2`.

### 18.4.3 Interface properties

This clause augments the description of properties in classes [§15.7](classes.md#157-properties) for properties declared in interfaces.

Interface properties are declared using *property_declaration*s ([§15.7.1](classes.md#1571-general)).

> *property_modifier* shall not include `override`.

Reviewer 3: This feels odd for a paragraph on its own. Perhaps this should be a list, with the previous paragraph being something like:

"Interface properties are declared using *property_declaration*s ([§15.7.1](classes.md#1571-general)) with the following additional rules:"

Reviewer 2: Updated all sections with more than one additional rule to follow this format.

An explicit interface member implementation shall not contain an *accessor_modifier* (§15.7.3).

A *property_declaration* that has a *block* as an *accessor_body* is a default implementation ([§18.1](interfaces.md#181-general)), so it is *not* abstract. An instance *property_declaration* that has no default implementation is always considered abstract; it is *never* considered to be an automatically implemented property ([§15.7.4](classes.md#1574-automatically-implemented-properties)).

> A derived interface mey implement an abstract interface property declared in a base interface.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A derived interface may implement an abstract interface property declared in a base interface.
```

A virtual method with implementation declared in an interface may be overridden to be abstract in a derived interface. This is known as ***reabstraction***.

> *Example*:
>
> <!-- Example: {template:"standalone-lib-without-using", name:"InterfaceMethods2"} -->
> ```csharp
> interface IA
> {
>     void M() { Console.WriteLine("IA.M"); }
> }
> 
> interface IB: IA
> {
>     abstract void IA.M();    // reabstraction of M
> }
> ```
>
> This is useful in derived interfaces where the default implementation of a method is inappropriate and a more appropriate implementation should be provided by implementing classes. *end example*

Reabstraction is also permissible in an implementing class.

> *Example*:
>
> <!-- Example: {template:"standalone-lib-without-using", name:"InterfaceMethods3"} -->
> ```csharp
> interface I1
> {
>     void M() { }
> }
> 
> abstract class C: I1
> {
>     public abstract void M(); // implement I1.M with an abstract method in C
> }
> ```
>
> *end example*

> Every interface and class shall have a most specific override for every virtual member among the overrides appearing in the type or its direct and indirect interfaces. The ***most specific override*** is a unique override that is more specific than every other override. If there is no override, the member itself is considered the most specific override.

Reviewer 6: What is "an override"?

Reviewer 2: I would use the term from the feature spec "most specific implementation". The feature spec defines it as 

> The most specific implementation is a unique implementation that is more specific than every other implementation. If there is no implementation, the member itself is considered the most specific implementation.

Reviewer 2: We prefer `override` here. But, we must ensure that `virtual` has a correct definition for interfaces that declare `virtual` members either abstract or non-abstract. 

Also, consider how to use the language or classes but, "stretch" it as appropriate for interface declarations.

Define "most specific override" in the context of interface declarations.

> }
> ```
>
> This is useful in derived interfaces where the implementation of a method is inappropriate and a more appropriate implementation should be provided by implementing classes. *end example*

### 18.4.3 Interface properties

This clause augments the description of properties in classes [§15.7](classes.md#157-properties) for properties declared in interfaces.

Interface properties are declared using *property_declaration*s ([§15.7.1](classes.md#1571-general)) with the following additional rules:

- *property_modifier* shall not include `override`.
- An explicit interface member implementation shall not contain an *accessor_modifier* (§15.7.3).
- A derived interface may implement an abstract interface property declared in a base interface.

  > *Note*: As an interface cannot contain instance fields, an interface property cannot be an instance auto-property, as that would require the declaration of implicit hidden instance fields. *end note*

- The type of an interface property shall be output-safe if there is a get accessor, and shall be input-safe if there is a set accessor.

> - A *property_declaration* that has a *block* as an *accessor_body* is an implementation ([§18.1](interfaces.md#181-general)), so it is *not* abstract. An instance *property_declaration* that has no implementation is always considered abstract; it is *never* considered to be an automatically implemented property ([§15.7.4](classes.md#1574-automatically-implemented-properties)).

Reviewer 4: What about expression-bodied properties: `int Prop => 42;`
And does this cover expression-bodied accessors? `int Prop { get => 42; }`?

Interface events are declared using *event_declaration*s ([§15.8.1](classes.md#1581-general)), with the following additional rules:

- *event_modifier* shall not include `override`.
- A derived interface may implement an abstract interface event declared in a base interface (§15.8.5).
- It is a compile-time error for *variable_declarators* in an instance *event_declaration* to contain any *variable_initializer*s.
- An instance event with the `virtual` or `sealed` modifiers must declare accessors. It is *never* considered to be an automatically implemented field-like event ([§15.8.2](classes.md#1582-field-like-events)).
- An instance event with the `abstract` modifier must not declare accessors.
- The type of an interface event shall be input-safe.

### 18.4.5 Interface indexers

This clause augments the description of indexers in classes [§15.9](classes.md#159-indexers) for indexers declared in interfaces.

Interface indexers are declared using *indexer_declaration*s ([§15.9](classes.md#159-indexers)), with the following additional rules:

- *indexer_modifier* shall not include `override`.

> - An *indexer_declaration* that has a *block* as an *accessor_body* is an implementation ([§18.1](interfaces.md#181-general)), so it is *not* abstract.

Reviewer 4: Same question about expression-bodied properties and expression-bodied accessors.

- All the parameter types of an interface indexer shall be input-safe ([§18.2.3.2](interfaces.md#18232-variance-safety)).
- Any output or reference parameter types shall also be output-safe.

  > *Note*: Output parameters are required to be input-safe due to common implementation restrictions. *end note*

- The type of an interface indexer shall be output-safe if there is a get accessor, and shall be input-safe if there is a set accessor.

### §interface-operators Interface operators

This clause augments the description of *operator_declaration* members in classes [§15.10](classes.md#1510-operators) for operators declared in interfaces.

An *operator_declaration* in an interface is the implementation ([§18.1](interfaces.md#181-general)).

It is a compile-time error for an interface to declare a conversion, equality, or inequality operator.

### §interface-static-constructors Interface static constructors

This clause augments the description of static constructors in classes [§15.12](classes.md#1512-static-constructors) for static constructors declared in interfaces.

> A *static_constructor_declaration* that has a *block* as a *static_constructor_body* is the implementation ([§18.1](interfaces.md#181-general)).

Reviewer 4: This leaves out expression-bodied static constructors, but I don't think we even need to make this conditional. It's also on the verge of "goes without saying" for me, since being virtual is impossible given what a static constructor _is_.
```suggestion
A *static_constructor_declaration* is the implementation ([§18.1](interfaces.md#181-general)).
```

Reviewer 2: I did a bit more work here, for a few reasons:

1. static constructors can't be abstract or virtual (as in classes).
2. The static constructor defined in an interface may not be called if none of the members defined in that interface are called (meaning the interface definition is never the "most specific implementation".

> This is actually a call to `C.M<E>`. But that call requires that `E` derive from `D`, so type safety would be violated here.
>
> *end example*
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD028 -->

<!-- markdownlint-enable MD028 -->

> > *Note*: See §interface-fields for an example that not only shows a static method with default implementation, but as that method is called `Main` and has the right return type and signature, it’s also an entry point! *end note*

Reviewer 4: There are some exclamation points being added in notes on this one 😂 Is that typical?

Reviewer: Nope it is not typical, I find just two occurrences of the RE `[a-z]!<space>` in the Standard and they’re both in example code. I agree it is not Standardese and we shouldn’t in general do it.

> A virtual method with implementation declared in an interface may be overridden to be abstract in a derived interface. This is known as ***reabstraction***.

Reviewer 4: We're flagging the term "override/overridden" in other comment threads; so, pointing it out here as well.

Reviewer 3: Would "re-abstraction" be clearer - particularly in terms of pronunciation - than "reabstraction"?

Reviewer 4: For me personally, I don't think the hyphen makes it any clearer despite it being a word I almost never come across. I'm not opposed though.

Reviewer 3: We decided not to hyphenate.

> 
> abstract class D: IA, IB, IC // OK
> {
>     public abstract void M();
> }
> ```
>
> The most specific override rule ensures that a conflict (i.e., an ambiguity arising from diamond inheritance) is resolved explicitly by the programmer at the point where the conflict arises. *end example*

It is an error if in a class declaration the most specific override of some interface method is an abstract override that was declared in an interface.

> *Example*:
>
> <!-- Example: {template:"standalone-lib-without-using", name:"InterfaceMethods5", expectedErrors:["CS0535"]} -->
> ```csharp
> interface IF
> {
>     void M();
> }
> 
> abstract class F : IF { } // error: 'F' does not implement 'IF.M'
> ```
>
> *end example*

### 18.4.3 Interface properties

[§15.7](classes.md#157-properties) and its subclauses cover property declarations in classes. When declaring properties in interfaces, that text needs to be interpreted in the context of an interface, and, where necessary, it is augmented and/or replaced by text in this subclause.

Interface properties are declared using *property_declaration*s ([§15.7.1](classes.md#1571-general)).

*property_modifier* shall not include `override`.

> A *property_declaration* that has a *block* as an *accessor_body* is a default implementation ([§18.1](interfaces.md#181-general)), so it is *not* part of the interface’s contract. A *property_declaration* that has no default implementation is always considered part of the interface’s contract; it is *never* considered to be an automatically implemented property ([§15.7.4](classes.md#1574-automatically-implemented-properties)).

Reviewer 4: Expression-bodied properties should be considered here. `int Prop => 42;` is a default implementation. Also echoing the concern about excluding DIMs from the "contract."

Reviewer 4: Can we also restrict this to talking about instance properties? I get confused when I enter this paragraph with `static int Prop { get; set; }` in mind, which is an auto prop.

  > *Note*: As an interface cannot contain instance fields, an interface property cannot be an instance auto-property, as that would require the declaration of implicit hidden instance fields. *end note*

- The type of an interface property shall be output-safe if there is a get accessor, and shall be input-safe if there is a set accessor.

> - A *property_declaration* that has a *block* or *expression-bodied-member* as an *accessor_body* is an implementation ([§18.1](interfaces.md#181-general)), so it is *not* abstract. An instance *property_declaration* that has no implementation is always considered abstract; it is *never* considered to be an automatically implemented property ([§15.7.4](classes.md#1574-automatically-implemented-properties)).

Reviewer 4: `int Prop => 42;` is not a property that _has_ an expression-bodied member; the property itself _is_ an expression-bodied member. I am also not sure that an accessor is called a member.

```suggestion
- A *property_declaration* that has an *expression body* or contains an accessor with a body is an implementation ([§18.1](interfaces.md#181-general)), so it is *not* abstract. An instance *property_declaration* that has no implementation is always considered abstract; it is *never* considered to be an automatically implemented property ([§15.7.4](classes.md#1574-automatically-implemented-properties)).
```

Interface indexers are declared using *indexer_declaration*s ([§15.9](classes.md#159-indexers)), with the following additional rules:

- *indexer_modifier* shall not include `override`.
- An *indexer_declaration* that has an *expression body* or contains an accessor with a body is `virtual`; the `virtual` modifier is not required, but is allowed.

> - An *indexer_declaration* whose accessors are semi-colons (`;`) is `abstract`; the `abstract` modifier is not required, but is allowed.

Reviewer 4: I would say that the accessor is `get;`, not that the accessor is `;`. The accessor _has_ a semi-colon. Per the previous comment, could we adopt the lingo here of "whose accessors have no bodies"?

Reviewer: @jnm2 – I understand where you’re coming from here, and most people probably think of a semicolon as “no body”. It would be great if indeed there was no body, but for syntax reasons there is – a semicolon.

To change I think wherever there is a semicolon body in the grammar it would need to change to something stating that this is referred to as having no body, and in other places state that having a block or expression is referred to as having a body, etc. 

it is a bit ugly as is, but it is precise, is it worth changing?

If you do decide to do a PR (post 8/pre 9?) I’ll agree to review, and I'll reserve my answer to whether it is worth it till then ;-)

Reviewer 2: For this PR, I did update the text to say "whose accessor bodies are `;`" rather than "whose accessors are `;`"

Reviewer 4: Opened https://github.com/dotnet/csharpstandard/issues/1430 to track this suggestion further.

Reviewer 2: See #1434

Interface indexers are declared using *indexer_declaration*s ([§15.9](classes.md#159-indexers)), with the following additional rules:

- *indexer_modifier* shall not include `override`.

> - An *indexer_declaration* that has a *block* or *expression-bodied-member* as an *accessor_body* is an implementation ([§18.1](interfaces.md#181-general)), so it is *not* abstract.

Reviewer 4: (As above)
```suggestion
- An *indexer_declaration* that has an *expression body* or contains an accessor with a body is an implementation ([§18.1](interfaces.md#181-general)), so it is *not* abstract.
```

- Otherwise, if `T` is a class and a direct or indirect base class declares an implementation of `I.M`, the most derived base class of `T` is the most specific override.
- Otherwise, if `I2` and `I3` are interfaces implemented by `T` and `I3` derives from `I2` either directly or indirectly, `I3.M` is a more specific implementation than `I2.M`.
- Otherwise, neither `I2.M` nor `I3.M` are more specific and an error occurs.

> *Example*:
>
> <!-- Example: {template:"standalone-lib-without-using", name:"InterfaceMethods4", expectedErrors:["CS8705"]} -->
> ```csharp
> interface IA
> {
>     void M() { Console.WriteLine("IA.M"); }
> }
> 
> interface IB : IA
> {
>     void IA.M() { Console.WriteLine("IB.M"); }
> }
> 
> interface IC: IA
> {
>     void IA.M() { Console.WriteLine("IC.M"); }
> }
> 
> abstract class C: IB, IC { } // error: no most specific override for 'IA.M'
> 
> abstract class D: IA, IB, IC // OK
> {
>     public abstract void M();
> }
> ```
>
> The most specific override rule ensures that a conflict (i.e., an ambiguity arising from diamond inheritance) is resolved explicitly by the programmer at the point where the conflict arises. *end example*

> It is an error if in a class declaration the most specific override of some interface method is an abstract override that was declared in a class or an interface.

Reviewer 4: Maybe?
```suggestion
It is an error in a class declaration if the most specific override of some interface method is an abstract override that was declared in a class or an interface.
```

> *Example*:
>
> <!-- Example: {template:"standalone-lib-without-using", name:"InterfaceMethods5", expectedErrors:["CS0535"]} -->
> ```csharp
> interface IF
> {
>     void M();
> }
> 
> abstract class F : IF { } // error: 'F' does not implement 'IF.M'
> ```
>
> *end example*

> It is an error if a property `P` has a most specific `get` accessor in one type `T1`, and a most specific `set` accessor in another type `T2`.

Reviewer 4: How is it possible for a property `P` has a most specific `get` accessor in one type `T1`, and a most specific `set` accessor in another type `T2`? It is an error for a property to be overridden/explicitly implemented without respecifying all accessors.

Reviewer 2: removed in next commit.

### 18.4.6 Interface member access

> Interface members are accessed through member access ([§12.8.7](expressions.md#1287-member-access)) and indexer access ([§12.8.12.3](expressions.md#128123-indexer-access)) expressions of the form `I.M` and `I[A]`, where `I` is an interface type, `M` is a constant, field, method, property, or event of that interface type, and `A` is an indexer argument list. If `M` is non-abstract, the name `M` is visible only in the interface `I` and interfaces derived from `I`.

Reviewer 4: Perhaps?
```suggestion
Interface members are accessed through member access ([§12.8.7](expressions.md#1287-member-access)) and indexer access ([§12.8.12.3](expressions.md#128123-indexer-access)) expressions of the form `I.M` and `I[A]`, where `I` is an interface type or an expression of an interface type, `M` is a constant, field, method, property, or event of that interface type, and `A` is an indexer argument list. If `M` is non-virtual, the name `M` is visible only in the interface `I` and interfaces derived from `I`.
```

>
> *end example*

### §most-specific-implementation most specific implementation

> Every class and struct shall have a most specific implementation for every virtual member declared in all interfaces implemented by that type among the overrides appearing in the type or its direct and indirect interfaces. The ***most specific implementation*** is a unique override that is more specific than every other override. If there is no override, the member itself is considered the most specific implementation.

Reviewer 4: I'm finding it confusing to bring in the topic of overrides at all. Do we need to?
```suggestion
Every class and struct shall have a most specific implementation for every virtual member declared in all interfaces implemented by that type among the implementations appearing in the type or its direct and indirect interfaces. The ***most specific implementation*** is a unique implementation that is more specific than every other implementation.
```

    ;
```

> Interface indexers are declared using *indexer_declaration*s ([§15.9](classes.md#159-indexers)).

Reviewer 3: Same comment as before about maybe using a list.

*indexer_modifier* shall not include `override`.

An *indexer_declaration* that has a *block* as an *accessor_body* is a default implementation ([§18.1](interfaces.md#181-general)), so it is *not* abstract.

All the parameter types of an interface indexer shall be input-safe ([§18.2.3.2](interfaces.md#18232-variance-safety)). In addition, any output or reference parameter types shall also be output-safe.

> *Note*: Output parameters are required to be input-safe due to common implementation restrictions. *end note*

The type of an interface indexer shall be output-safe if there is a get accessor, and shall be input-safe if there is a set accessor.

### §interface-operators Interface operators

This clause augments the description of *operator_declaration* members in classes [§15.10](classes.md#1510-operators) for operators declared in interfaces.

> An *operator_declaration* in an interface is a default implementation ([§18.1](interfaces.md#181-general)).

Reviewer 3: This doesn't sound right to me. For example, look at https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.numerics.iadditionoperators-3.op_addition?view=net-9.0- there's no default implementation there, is there?

Reviewer 4: The operator you linked is a static abstract interface member, which is not possible in C# 8. Static abstract interface members don't show up in C# until version 11 (https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/whats-new/csharp-11#generic-math-support).

However, as I commented elsewhere, "default implementation" doesn't sound right for static members because it implies that there could be more than one implementation. In C# 8, for a static interface member, there cannot.

Reviewer 3: Definitely some more work to do; will discuss offline.

Reviewer 2: This is true for all static members, in a sense. Operators are unique because at least one operator must be the containing type, so operators declared in a derived interface have different signatures and are overloads.

For normal static methods, if a derived interface declares the same signature, the derived type must use the `new` modifier.

In all cases, I can replace "default implementation" with "implementation" and the language gets simpler:  A method with an implementation is already not abstract, so we're good. In fact, adding `abstract` to a member with an implementation is an error.

> It is a compile-time error for an interface to contain a conversion, equality, or inequality operator.

Reviewer 3: Perhaps declare instead of contain?

>     void IA.M() { Console.WriteLine("IC.M"); }
> }
> 
> abstract class C: IB, IC { } // error: no most specific implementation for 'IA.M'
> 
> abstract class D: IA, IB, IC // OK
> {
>     public abstract void M();
> }
> ```
>

> > The most specific implementation rule ensures that a conflict (i.e., an ambiguity arising from diamond inheritance) is resolved explicitly by the programmer at the point where the conflict arises. *end example*

Reviewer 3: Is a conflict *always* due to diamond inheritance?

Reviewer 2: It would be some configuration that has two different paths through implemented interfaces where some base interface is included twice. So, yes, if we believe a diamond isn't strictly 4 vertices. 

Given that this is informative, I think it's fine.

Reviewer 3: Fine by me.

### 19.4.6 Interface member access

Interface members are accessed through member access ([§12.8.7](expressions.md#1287-member-access)) and indexer access ([§12.8.12.4](expressions.md#128124-indexer-access)) expressions of the form `I.M` and `I[A]`, where `I` is an interface type, `M` is a constant, field, method, property, or event of that interface type, and `A` is an indexer argument list.

> In a class `D`, with direct or indirect base class `B`, where `B` directly or indirectly implements interface `I` and `I` defines a method `M()`, the expression `base.M()` is valid only if the most specific implementation (§most-specific-implementation) of `M()` is in a class type.

Reviewer 4: It's much clearer to say that the validity of `base.M()` depends entirely on whether some base class defines _its own_ member `M()`. Whether or not its own member `M()` is an implementation of some `I.M()` does not affect the validity of `base.M()` one way or another.

Reviewer 4: This is again another case of: interface member names do not appear on classes and structs. An interface member is never available for lookup on a class- or struct-typed expression. A member is available for lookup on a class- or struct-typed expression if, and only if, the class or struct manually declares such a member of its own, accessibly. It may or may not be implementing an interface member in doing so.

Reviewer 4: Also, here's an example where the expression `base.M()` is valid, but the most specific implementation of `I.M()` is not in a class type:
```cs
interface I 
{ 
    void M() => Console.WriteLine("impl");
}

class B : I
{
    public Action M => () => Console.WriteLine("Unrelated impl via a property");
}

class D : B
{
    void Example() => base.M(); // This is not I.M();
}
```

Reviewer 2: Changed to reference binding, and specify that it binds to a class member.

Interfaces may be implemented by classes and structs. To indicate that a class or struct directly implements an interface, the interface is included in the base class list of the class or struct.

> A class or struct `C` that implements an interface `I` must provide or inherit an implementation for every member declared in `I`. Public members of `I` may be defined in public members of `C`. Non-public members declared in `I` that are accessible in `C` may be defined in `C` using explicit interface implmentation (§19.6.2). Non-accessible members, such as `private` members of `I` can't be defined in `C`.

Reviewer: This starts off with “must provide or inherit an implementation for *every* member declared in `I`” (emphasis added), then says how some of these members may be given implementations, and ends with “Non-accessible members, such as `private` members of `I` can't be defined in `C`” – should this last statement say something along the lines that in this case an implementation must be inherited (or something else)?

Reviewer 2: This might be better handled in another PR.  The rules in this PR state that an interface that declares a private member must provide a definition for that member. It's inaccessible to any derived interface or class, or struct that implements the interface.

It might be that this can just remove removed. Otherwise, it should relate to those rules as well.

Reviewer: @BillWagner – Maybe:

```suggestion
A class or struct `C` that implements an interface `I` must provide or inherit an implementation for every member declared in `I` that `C` can access. Public members of `I` may be defined in public members of `C`. Non-public members declared in `I` that are accessible in `C` may be defined in `C` using explicit interface implementation (§19.6.2).
```

or something like that? (Fixed a typo as well that I just spotted.)

>
> *end example*

> It is not possible to access an explicit interface member implementation through its qualified interface member name in a method invocation, property access, event access, or indexer access. An explicit instance interface member implementation can only be accessed through an interface instance, and is in that case referenced simply by its member name. An explicit interface static member implementation can only be accessed through the interface name.

Reviewer 3: Let's be consistent in ordering here - either "explicit interface instance member" and "explicit interface static memeber" *or* "explicit instance interface member" and "explicit static interface member". I think I'd prefer the former, to keep "explicit interface" together everywhere, but I'm happy to go with consensus.
